README.md, before:

# Convey

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/cscade/convey.png?branch=develop)](https://travis-ci.org/cscade/convey)

The purpose of `convey` is to automate the transition of your app's CouchDB designs and existing documents when your release version changes. Often, a new version of your app will bring with it new features, new validation, document structure changes, etc. One way to handle document structure changes is to perform checks within any code that may use a given document resource, to see what version it is and adjust as needed. While that may work, it rapidly gets messy - and are you sure you got every case everywhere in your app? Furthermore, how will you know when all your documents have been updated and the "upgrade" code is no longer needed?

With convey, you can define arbitrary actions to take place within your CouchDB databases when each new version of your app starts up for the first time in production. This includes document updates, document creation, design publishing, and even the ability to publish to/modify documents in sub-databases defined by views.

Relax, and convey your updates the first time.

## Installation

Install convey locally and include it in your `package.json` with;

```
npm install --save convey
```

## Usage

Convey will publish, update, and create couch designs and userland documents based on the configuration you provide. Convey stores a single `convey-version` document in each database it is configured to watch, and will only perform actions if the version has changed since it was last run, or it was "forced" (see options section below).

### A basic json configuration file

```json
{
	"myDatabase": {
		"myResource": "couch/designs/myResource"
	}
}
```

In this simple example, convey would look for a resource document at `./couch/designs/myResource`, relative to `process.cwd()`. It would take the contents of that resource document and apply it to the couch database `myDatabase`.

Let's take a look at what a simple resource document might look like.

### A basic javascript resource file

```javascript
/*
	myResource
*/

// Design to publish.
exports.design = {
	_id:"_design/someDesign",
	language: "javascript",
	views: {
		allTheThings: {
			map: function (doc) {
				if (doc.resource === 'thing') {
					emit(doc._id, null);
				}
			}
		}
	}
};

// Updates to convey.
exports.convey = function (doc, next) {
	if (doc.resource !== 'thing') return next();
	doc.foo = 'bar';
	next(doc);
};
```

This resource document contains both types of assets that convey can act on; a design, and an edit/create method. Both are optional. As you can see, the name of the resource is arbitrary, and does not define the name of the design that will be published to couch. Your design's `_id` field is still what matters.

The `design` export is a normal couch design document, and can contain anything couch knows how to deal with, for instance a `validate_doc_update` method. The design will be published if it doesn't already exist, and will be updated if it does exist.

### exports.design

The design example above supplies an `allTheThings` view, which contains all the documents with a `resource` property of `thing`. Basic stuff. As mentioned above, these are normal couch designs. Go nuts.

### exports.convey

The edit/create method that convey will call to check documents against your changes is defined here. This method will be passed *every document in the database*, one at a time, while convey is running a check pass. You can perform any changes you like to the document, and pass it back to convey with `next(doc)`. 

In the example above, the next release version of our app will require `thing` documents to have a `foo` property, so we add foo to each thing document, and then pass it back to convey to update in the database.

If you don't want to update a document, simply don't pass it back to `next()`, and convey will move on to the next document without changing anything.

If you only want to use convey to publish design updates and don't care about inline edit/create, just omit the export entirely. The only thing that is required is if you *do* provide a method, be sure to call next no matter if you update the document or not.

### Getting it all to run

Once you have a configuration file and a resource document set up, you're ready to roll.

```javascript
var Convey = require('convey').Convey;

var convey = new Convey();

convey.check('http://localhost:5984', '0.1.0', 'convey.json');
```

Using this code, convey will check each database in your configuration file, and verify that each resource in that database has already been updated to version '0.1.0'. If any resource has not been updated, convey will update the design for that resource, and run all the documents in the database against the edit/create method for that resource. Next time your app runs, convey will know that the work has already been done for this version and move on. It really is that simple.

Convey uses [node-semver](https://github.com/isaacs/node-semver) to compare all your version numbers, and decide what is newer.

For more advanced configuration and options, read on.

## Creating new documents

The `next` method will also accept entirely new documents to be created. This option is handy if your application design has changed in such a way that one monolithic document has been broken into sub-documents for example.

```javascript
exports.convey = function (doc, next) {
	var newDoc;
	
	if (doc.resource !== 'thing') return next();
	// Update the existing thing-type documents.
	doc.foo = 'bar';
	// Create a new document for each thing-type document as well.
	newDoc = {
		resource: 'subThing',
		parent: doc._id
	};
	next(doc, newDoc);
};
```

As with `doc`, `newDoc` is entirely optional and you can pass either, both, or none. doc will be updated if provided, and newDoc will be created if provided.

## Events & Logging

Convey is a good stdio citizen. It won't print anything to stdout or stderr, ever. But never fear, it does provide rich events that let you hook into what's happening and log to your heart's content.

### Primary events

#### start

```javascript
convey.on('start', function (info) {
	/*
		info.couch: The couchdb url convey is acting against.
		info.version: The version string convey is currently checking your databases against.
		info.config: The configuration object convey is working against.
	*/
});
```

#### done

```javascript
convey.on('done', function (info) {
	/*
		Convey is done with all databases.
		
		info.duration: The total execution time, in seconds.
	*/
});
```

### Database level events

#### database:start

```javascript
convey.on('database:start', function (info) {
	/*
		info.database: The name of the database work is now beginning on.
	*/
});
```

#### database:untouched

```javascript
convey.on('database:untouched', function (info) {
	/*
		Fires only when the database work has just begun on has no `convey-version` document,
		indicating this is the first pass.
		
		info.database: The name of the database work is now beginning on.
	*/
});
```

#### database:done

```javascript
convey.on('database:done', function (info) {
	/*
		info.database: The name of the database work has just completed on.
	*/
});
```

### Resource level events

#### resource:fresh

```javascript
convey.on('resource:fresh', function (info) {
	/*
		Fires when a resource has already been updated to the current version.
		
		info.database: The name of the database this resource resides in.
		info.resource: The name of the resource currently being worked on, from the configuration file.
	*/
});
```

### resource:stale

```javascript
convey.on('resource:stale', function (info) {
	/*
		Fires when a resource has not been updated to the current version, and updates
		are about to commence.
		
		info.database: The name of the database this resource resides in.
		info.resource: The name of the resource currently being worked on, from the configuration file.
		info.forced: `true` if the resource was "forced" to be stale. See methods.
	*/
});
```

### resource:done

```javascript
convey.on('resource:done', function (info) {
	/*
		Fires when a resource has been processed. This event will not fire unless
		the resource was also stale.
		
		info.database: The name of the database this resource resides in.
		info.resource: The name of the resource currently being worked on, from the configuration file.
		info.updated: A count of the number of documents updated.
		info.created: A count of the number of documents created.
	*/
});
```

## Constructor options

```javascript
convey = new Convey(options);
```

* `extendDocument` - Object. Use this option to include any data you need to have "extended in" to the `convey-version` document. A common use case is supporting databases with validate_doc_update checks that require particualar properties on all documents.

## Instance methods

### check(couch, version, config, [force])

The check method is your primary interaction point with convey. Call it whenever you want a full check of all configured databases to occur, typically on each application startup.

* `couch` - mixed. The connection information for [nano](https://github.com/dscape/nano). Anything you could normally pass to `require('nano')(...)`
* `version` - String. The version number to update all configured databases to.
* `config` - String. Configuration file location, relative to `process.cwd()`.
* `force` - Boolean. Force all resources in all configured databases to be "stale", regardless of their last checked version.
	* This option is useful in development, when your designs are changing often and you went to keep them up to date with each application restart.

## Tests

Full test coverage is provided. You'll need a reachable CouchDB, and the dev dependencies.

```
git clone git://github.com/cscade/convey.git && cd convey && npm install
COUCH=http://your-couch-url:5984 npm test
```

## License

(The MIT License)

Copyright (c) 2013 Carson Christian <cscade@gmail.com>

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the 'Software'), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED 'AS IS', WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

Commit message:

add section about error handling

README.md, after:

# Convey

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/cscade/convey.png?branch=develop)](https://travis-ci.org/cscade/convey)

The purpose of `convey` is to automate the transition of your app's CouchDB designs and existing documents when your release version changes. Often, a new version of your app will bring with it new features, new validation, document structure changes, etc. One way to handle document structure changes is to perform checks within any code that may use a given document resource, to see what version it is and adjust as needed. While that may work, it rapidly gets messy - and are you sure you got every case everywhere in your app? Furthermore, how will you know when all your documents have been updated and the "upgrade" code is no longer needed?

With convey, you can define arbitrary actions to take place within your CouchDB databases when each new version of your app starts up for the first time in production. This includes document updates, document creation, design publishing, and even the ability to publish to/modify documents in sub-databases defined by views.

Relax, and convey your updates the first time.

## Installation

Install convey locally and include it in your `package.json` with;

```
npm install --save convey
```

## Usage

Convey will publish, update, and create couch designs and userland documents based on the configuration you provide. Convey stores a single `convey-version` document in each database it is configured to watch, and will only perform actions if the version has changed since it was last run, or it was "forced" (see options section below).

### A basic json configuration file

```json
{
	"myDatabase": {
		"myResource": "couch/designs/myResource"
	}
}
```

In this simple example, convey would look for a resource document at `./couch/designs/myResource`, relative to `process.cwd()`. It would take the contents of that resource document and apply it to the couch database `myDatabase`.

Let's take a look at what a simple resource document might look like.

### A basic javascript resource file

```javascript
/*
	myResource
*/

// Design to publish.
exports.design = {
	_id:"_design/someDesign",
	language: "javascript",
	views: {
		allTheThings: {
			map: function (doc) {
				if (doc.resource === 'thing') {
					emit(doc._id, null);
				}
			}
		}
	}
};

// Updates to convey.
exports.convey = function (doc, next) {
	if (doc.resource !== 'thing') return next();
	doc.foo = 'bar';
	next(doc);
};
```

This resource document contains both types of assets that convey can act on; a design, and an edit/create method. Both are optional. As you can see, the name of the resource is arbitrary, and does not define the name of the design that will be published to couch. Your design's `_id` field is still what matters.

The `design` export is a normal couch design document, and can contain anything couch knows how to deal with, for instance a `validate_doc_update` method. The design will be published if it doesn't already exist, and will be updated if it does exist.

### exports.design

The design example above supplies an `allTheThings` view, which contains all the documents with a `resource` property of `thing`. Basic stuff. As mentioned above, these are normal couch designs. Go nuts.

### exports.convey

The edit/create method that convey will call to check documents against your changes is defined here. This method will be passed *every document in the database*, one at a time, while convey is running a check pass. You can perform any changes you like to the document, and pass it back to convey with `next(doc)`. 

In the example above, the next release version of our app will require `thing` documents to have a `foo` property, so we add foo to each thing document, and then pass it back to convey to update in the database.

If you don't want to update a document, simply don't pass it back to `next()`, and convey will move on to the next document without changing anything.

If you only want to use convey to publish design updates and don't care about inline edit/create, just omit the export entirely. The only thing that is required is if you *do* provide a method, be sure to call next no matter if you update the document or not.

### Getting it all to run

Once you have a configuration file and a resource document set up, you're ready to roll.

```javascript
var Convey = require('convey').Convey;

var convey = new Convey();

convey.check('http://localhost:5984', '0.1.0', 'convey.json');
```

Using this code, convey will check each database in your configuration file, and verify that each resource in that database has already been updated to version '0.1.0'. If any resource has not been updated, convey will update the design for that resource, and run all the documents in the database against the edit/create method for that resource. Next time your app runs, convey will know that the work has already been done for this version and move on. It really is that simple.

Convey uses [node-semver](https://github.com/isaacs/node-semver) to compare all your version numbers, and decide what is newer.

For more advanced configuration and options, read on.

## Creating new documents

The `next` method will also accept entirely new documents to be created. This option is handy if your application design has changed in such a way that one monolithic document has been broken into sub-documents for example.

```javascript
exports.convey = function (doc, next) {
	var newDoc;
	
	if (doc.resource !== 'thing') return next();
	// Update the existing thing-type documents.
	doc.foo = 'bar';
	// Create a new document for each thing-type document as well.
	newDoc = {
		resource: 'subThing',
		parent: doc._id
	};
	next(doc, newDoc);
};
```

As with `doc`, `newDoc` is entirely optional and you can pass either, both, or none. doc will be updated if provided, and newDoc will be created if provided.

## Events & Logging

Convey is a good stdio citizen. It won't print anything to stdout or stderr, ever. But never fear, it does provide rich events that let you hook into what's happening and log to your heart's content.

### Primary events

#### start

```javascript
convey.on('start', function (info) {
	/*
		info.couch: The couchdb url convey is acting against.
		info.version: The version string convey is currently checking your databases against.
		info.config: The configuration object convey is working against.
	*/
});
```

#### done

```javascript
convey.on('done', function (info) {
	/*
		Convey is done with all databases.
		
		info.duration: The total execution time, in seconds.
	*/
});
```

### Database level events

#### database:start

```javascript
convey.on('database:start', function (info) {
	/*
		info.database: The name of the database work is now beginning on.
	*/
});
```

#### database:untouched

```javascript
convey.on('database:untouched', function (info) {
	/*
		Fires only when the database work has just begun on has no `convey-version` document,
		indicating this is the first pass.
		
		info.database: The name of the database work is now beginning on.
	*/
});
```

#### database:done

```javascript
convey.on('database:done', function (info) {
	/*
		info.database: The name of the database work has just completed on.
	*/
});
```

### Resource level events

#### resource:fresh

```javascript
convey.on('resource:fresh', function (info) {
	/*
		Fires when a resource has already been updated to the current version.
		
		info.database: The name of the database this resource resides in.
		info.resource: The name of the resource currently being worked on, from the configuration file.
	*/
});
```

### resource:stale

```javascript
convey.on('resource:stale', function (info) {
	/*
		Fires when a resource has not been updated to the current version, and updates
		are about to commence.
		
		info.database: The name of the database this resource resides in.
		info.resource: The name of the resource currently being worked on, from the configuration file.
		info.forced: `true` if the resource was "forced" to be stale. See methods.
	*/
});
```

### resource:done

```javascript
convey.on('resource:done', function (info) {
	/*
		Fires when a resource has been processed. This event will not fire unless
		the resource was also stale.
		
		info.database: The name of the database this resource resides in.
		info.resource: The name of the resource currently being worked on, from the configuration file.
		info.updated: A count of the number of documents updated.
		info.created: A count of the number of documents created.
	*/
});
```

## Error handling

As an `EventEmitter`, convey will emit all errors it encounters as an `error` event.

```javascript
convey.on('error', function (e) {
	...
});
```

## Constructor options

```javascript
convey = new Convey(options);
```

* `extendDocument` - Object. Use this option to include any data you need to have "extended in" to the `convey-version` document. A common use case is supporting databases with validate_doc_update checks that require particualar properties on all documents.

## Instance methods

### check(couch, version, config, [force])

The check method is your primary interaction point with convey. Call it whenever you want a full check of all configured databases to occur, typically on each application startup.

* `couch` - mixed. The connection information for [nano](https://github.com/dscape/nano). Anything you could normally pass to `require('nano')(...)`
* `version` - String. The version number to update all configured databases to.
* `config` - String. Configuration file location, relative to `process.cwd()`.
* `force` - Boolean. Force all resources in all configured databases to be "stale", regardless of their last checked version.
	* This option is useful in development, when your designs are changing often and you went to keep them up to date with each application restart.

## Tests

Full test coverage is provided. You'll need a reachable CouchDB, and the dev dependencies.

```
git clone git://github.com/cscade/convey.git && cd convey && npm install
COUCH=http://your-couch-url:5984 npm test
```

## License

(The MIT License)

Copyright (c) 2013 Carson Christian <cscade@gmail.com>

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the 'Software'), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED 'AS IS', WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
